README.md, before:

# no-frills-transformation

"No frills transformation" (NFT) is intended to be a super lightweight transformation engine, with very limited support for reading and writing stuff, but having an extensible interface.

Out of the box, NFT will read:

* CSV files

and write

* CSV files

because... that's what I currently need ;-)

In an ETL scenario, NFT is neither designed to do the "E" nor the "L" part, just simple "T" tasks. 
But that quickly and efficiently, supporting the basic transformation stuff you might need (and
 with extensibility support if you need something out of the order). Among supported transformations are:

* Copy (nop transformation, copy source to target)
* Lookup (in other sources)
* Filtering (on source data)

Feel free to contribute and create pull requests. I'll check them out and merge them if they make sense.

## Binary Downloads

There are no binary downloads just yet.

This project has to settle down a little first, then I'll release something.

I'd say that NFT may already be used in production, or for serious things, like migrations and stuff,
but there's still too many parts moving. Check back in a while, or, if you can't get it to compile, 
get back to me.

## Acknowledgements

NFT (the CSV plugin to be more precise) is using parts of the brilliant CSV reader library written by
Sebastien Lorion. You can find the original project page at CodeProject:

http://www.codeproject.com/Articles/9258/A-Fast-CSV-Reader

NFT has pulled in the CSV parts in the source code directly. They can be found here:

https://github.com/DonMartin76/no-frills-transformation/tree/master/src/3rdParty/LumenWorks.Framework.IO

## Introduction

Nah. I hate reading. Let's get into the details on usage.

## Configuration

The basic idea of NFT is that you configure the transformations using an XML file. The XML file contains
the following main parts:

* A data source
* Source filters
* A target
* Lookup map definitions
* Target field definitions

### Sample XML config file

A typical simple XML configuration may look like this:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<Transformation>
  <Source config="delim=','">file://C:\temp\users.csv</Source>
  <Target config="delim=','">file://C:\temp\Accounts.csv</Target>
  <LookupMaps>
    <LookupMap keyField="id" name="Status">
      <Source config="delim=','">file://C:\temp\status_mapping.csv</Source>
    </LookupMap>
  </LookupMaps>

  <FilterMode>AND</FilterMode>
  <SourceFilters>
    <!-- In shorter, this is just Contains($SOBID, "A") -->
    <SourceFilter>EqualsIgnoreCase(If(Contains($SOBID, "A"), "hooray", "boo"), "HooRay")</SourceFilter>
  </SourceFilters>

  <Mappings>
    <Mapping>
      <Fields>
        <!-- The target row number -->
        <Field name="RowNo" maxSize="10">TargetRowNum()</Field>
        <!-- The source row number -->
        <Field name="SourceRowNo" maxSize="10">SourceRowNum()</Field>
        <!-- Plain copy of field content -->
        <Field name="SapUserId__c" maxSize="16">LowerCase($SOBID)</Field>
        <!-- Concatenation of two source fields -->
        <Field name="Whatever" maxSize="50">Concat($OTYPE, $OBJID)</Field>
        <!-- status mapping from lookup "Status" (see definition above) -->
        <Field name="Status" maxSize="40">Status($BOGUSTYPE, $salesforce_status)</Field>
      </Fields>
    </Mapping>
  </Mappings>
</Transformation>
```

So, what does this do?
* Reads data from `C:\temp\users.csv`
* Writes data to `C:\temp\Accounts.csv`
* Loads a lookup map into the operator `Status` from `C:\temp\status_mapping.csv`
* Sets the filter mode to `AND` (all filter criteria must be met)
* Specifies a filter by using an expression which evaluates to a boolean
* Specifies a mapping with five output fields, each with a name, max size and an expression

Please confer with the later sections for a more detailed specification of the options.

## XML specification

### Source and Target tags

**Mandatory tags**

The syntax for source and target tags is as follows:
```xml
<Source config="config string">source URI</Source>
<Target config="config string">target URI</Source>
```

| Tag/Attribute | Description|
| ------------- | ----------- |
| `Source`		| Tag used for the data source of the transformation; must only be present once in the configuration |
| `Target`		| Tag used for the target of the transformation; must only be present once in the configuration |
| `config`		| Configuration string for the reader/writer. The format of this string is depending on the plugin selected for reading/writing to the URI |

##### CSV Reader Configuration Syntax

The CSV Reader which is supplied with NFT out of the box supports the following configuration settings, supplied in this format:

```
option1=value1 option2=value2
```

| Option | Possible values |
| ------ | --------------- |
| `delim`  | Delimiter character; defaults to `','`. Other normal option is `';'` |
| `multiline` | Switches support for multiline CSV records on or off; possible values are `false` or `true`. Defaults to `true` |


##### CSV Writer Configuration Syntax

The CSV Writer which is supplied with NFT out of the box supports the following configuration settings, supplied in this format:

```
option1=value1 option2=value2
```

| Option | Possible values |
| ------ | --------------- |
| `delim`  | Delimiter character; defaults to `','`. Other normal option is `';'` |

### <a name="lookupTag"></a>Lookup map definitions

_Optional tags_

The syntax for defining lookup maps is as follows:
```xml
<LookupMaps>
	<LookupMap keyField="key field" name="operator name">
		<Source config="config string">source URI</Source>
	</LookupMap>
</LookupMaps>
```

The tag `LookupMap` may be defined multiply. The tag `LookupMaps` (the container) must only exist once (or not at all, if not needed).

| Tag/Attribute | Description|
| ------------- | ----------- |
| `LookupMaps`	| Container tag for the lookup maps |
| `LookupMap`	| Tag for defining a lookup map |
| `keyField`	| This attribute defines which field in the source is used for indexing. This is the field which will serve as the key for the lookup map. |
| `name`		| The name of the lookup map. This name can be used in expressions to look up values when transforming to output fields. [See section on lookups](#lookup) below (Expression syntax) |
| `Source`		| Tag used for the data source of the lookup map |
| `config`		| Configuration string for the reader. The format of this string is depending on the plugin selected for reading from the URI |

### Filtering

_Optional tags_

The filtering definition section of the configuration file consists of the following parts:
```xml
<FilterMode>filter mode</FilterMode>
<SourceFilters>
	<SourceFilter>boolean filter expression</SourceFilter>
</SourceFilters>
```

| Tag/Attribute | Description|
| ------------- | ----------- |
| `FilterMode`	| This tag decides on the filtering mode; possible values are `AND` and `OR`. In `AND` mode, all filter criteria must be met. In `OR` mode, one or more criteria must be met. |
| `SourceFilters` | Container tag for source filters. |
| `SourceFilter` | Definition of a filter; any number of this tag may exist. Content of this tag must be an Expression which evaluates to a boolean value. The expression may contain all operators available within NFT, [even including lookups](#lookup) |

**Example:**

```xml
<FilterMode>OR</FilterMode>
<SourceFilters>
	<SourceFilter>StartsWith($LastName, "A")</SourceFilter>
	<SourceFilter>StartsWith($LastName, "B")</SourceFilter>
</SourceFilters>
```
This filter definition will take all source rows in which the field `LastName` starts with either A or B.

### <a name="fields"></a>Field definitions

**Mandatory tags**

Within the `Mappings` tags, the output fields are defined using expressions.
```xml
<Mappings>
  <Mapping>
    <Fields>
	  <!-- Multiple occurance -->
      <Field name="field name" maxSize="max size">field expression</Field>
    </Fields>
  </Mapping>
</Mappings>
```

| Tag/Attribute | Description|
| ------------- | ----------- |
| `Mappings`    | Container tag for mappings |
| `Mapping`     | Container tag for a single mapping. Currently, NFT only supports a single mapping, this might change in the future, though |
| `Fields`      | Container tag for field definitions. |
| `Field`       | Field definition. Must contain a field expression evaluating to a string (or bool, which is converted to `true` or `false`). See below for [possible expression operators](#expressionSyntax). |
| `name`        | The name of the output field; this is the field name as it will be passed to the writer, e.g. for writing a header row (in case of CSV) |
| `maxSize`     | The maximum size of the output field (in characters). This is currently not used by the CSV reader or writer, but may be useful for future plugins, such as database writers. |

**Examples:**

```xml
<Field name="FirstName">$FNAM</Field>
```
Copies (no transformation) the content of the source field `FNAM` into a target field called `FirstName`

```xml
<Field name="FullName">Concat($FNAM, Concat(" ", $LNAM))</Field>
```
Concatenates the source fields `FNAM` and `LNAM` and a space (as a string literal `" "`) and outputs that into a target field `FullName`

```xml
<LookupMaps>
	<LookupMap keyField="statusId" name="StatusLookup">
		<Source config="delim=','">file://C:\Temp\StatusMap.csv</Source>
	</LookupMap>
</LookupMaps>
...
<Field name="Status">StatusLookup($STATUS, $Description)</Field>
...
```
Looks up the `Description` field from a defined lookup with the name `StatusLookup`, using the key in the source field `STATUS`.
This requires the lookup having been defined using a `<LookupMap>` tag (see example code).

### <a name="expressionSyntax"></a>Expression syntax

Expressions can be freely combined, as long as the return types are correct. There are only
two different return types (currently), bool and string.

In addition to the operators below, there are two special expressions: Field names, and string
literals. Both can be used anywhere a string expression can be used (with one exception, see [Lookup](#lookup)).

A field name is given by using the dollar ($) operator: e.g. `$title`, or `$firstName`.

A string literal is defined by putting a string within double quotes, e.g. `"this is a text"`.

#### And

And operator. Returns `true` if both parameters return true.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `And(param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | bool |
| Parameter 2 | bool |
| Return type | bool |

**Example:** `And(Contains($title, "Lord"), Contains($author, "Tolkien"))`

#### Concat

Concatenates two strings.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `Concat(param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | string |

**Example**: `Concat($firstName, Concat(" ", $lastName))`
 

#### Contains, ContainsIgnoreCase

Checks whether parameter 1 contains parameter 2. Comes in two flavors, `Contains` which takes
casing into account, and `ContainsIgnoreCase` which doesn't.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `Contains[IgnoreCase](param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | bool |

**Example**: `ContainsIgnoreCase($companyName, "Ltd.")`


#### EndsWith

Checks whether parameter 1 ends with parameters, returns a boolean value.
This operator ignores the case.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `EndsWith(param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | bool |

**Example**: `EndsWith($companyName, "Ltd.")`


#### Equals, EqualsIgnoreCase

Checks whether to strings are equal. Comes in two flavors, `Equals` and `EqualsIgnoreCase`.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `Equals[IgnoreCase](param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | bool |

**Example**: `Equals($firstName, "Martin")`


#### If

Evaluates the first argument; if it evaluates to `true`, returns the second argument, otherwise
the third.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `If(condition, param1, param2)` |
| Condition | bool |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | string |

**Example**: `If(Contains($firstName, "Martin"), "good", "bad")`


#### <a name="lookup"></a>Lookups

Lookups must be defined in the LookupMaps described above. After that, the name of the lookup
map can be used as a binary operator which returns a string value.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `[LookupName](param1, param2)`, `[LookupName]` is defined with the `name` [attribute of the `LookupMap` tag](#lookupTag). |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | string |

**Example**:
```xml
<LookupMaps>
  <LookupMap keyField="id" name="StatusLookup">
    <Source config="delim=','">file://C:\Temp\status_mapping.csv</Source>
  </LookupMap>
</LookupMaps>
```

In the [section on the field definitions](#fields) there is a further simple example on how to use lookup maps in expressions.

**Pro tip:** Nested lookups are also allowed. Typical use cases would be string to string mappings, where the source field
and desired outcome may not be strings, but rather indexes. Example:
```xml
<Field name="Status">TargetStatus(SourceStatus($StatusId, $StatusText), $TargetText)</Field>
```
This expression first looks up a `StatusText` from the `SourceStatus` lookup map, then maps that text using the `TargetStatus`
lookup map, and subsequently outputs the `TargetText` of that map into a target field called `Status`. The transformation is thus
the following:

```
Source.StatusId --> SourceStatus.StatusText --> TargetStatus.TargetText --> Target.Status
```

#### LowerCase

Transforms a string into lower case.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `LowerCase(param1)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Return type | string |

**Example**: `LowerCase($emailAddress)`


#### Or

Or operator. Returns `true` if one of the parameters return true.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `Or(param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | bool |
| Parameter 2 | bool |
| Return type | bool |

**Example**: `Or(Contains($title, "Lord"), Contains($title, "Ring"))`


#### StartsWith

Checks whether parameter 1 starts with parameters, returns a boolean value.
This operator ignores the case.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `StartsWith(param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | bool |

**Example**: `StartsWith($lastName, "M")`


#### UpperCase

Transforms a string into upper case.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `UpperCase(param1)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Return type | string |

**Example**: `UpperCase($city)`


## Extension points

NFT is leveraging MEF ([Microsoft Extension Framework](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/en-en/library/dd460648(v=vs.110).aspx))
for dependency injection (inversion of control). There are two interfaces which may be used to hook into NFT:

```csharp
public interface ISourceReaderFactory
{
    bool CanReadSource(string source);

    ISourceReader CreateReader(string source, string config);
    bool SupportsQuery { get; }
}

public interface ITargetWriterFactory
{
    bool CanWriteTarget(string target);
    ITargetWriter CreateWriter(string target, string[] fieldNames, int[] fieldSizes, string config);
}
```

Both interfaces make use of methods to find out whether the reader/writer can read/write the source/target, based on
the format of the source/target string.

As an example, the CSV Plugin returns true for URIs starting with `file://` and ending with `.csv`.

### Writing plugins

Writing a plugin consists of following these steps:

* Create a new assembly for .NET 4.0 and reference `NoFrillsTransformation.Interfaces` and `System.ComponentModel.Composition` (this is the MEF framework)
* Implement `ISourceReaderFactory` and/or `ITargetWriterFactory`
* Mark the classes as `[Export(typeof(ISourceReaderFactory))]` or `[Export(typeof(ITargetWriterFactory))]`, respectively (see below)
* Implement the `ISourceReader` and `IRecord` interfaces for reading sources
* And/or implement the `ITargetWriter` interface for writing to targets

Make sure that the assembly resides in the same directory as the EXE file; NFT should now automatically
pick up the plugin and start reading and/or writing from/to the new source/target.

Snippet from the `CsvWriterFactory`:

```csharp
[Export(typeof(NoFrillsTransformation.Interfaces.ITargetWriterFactory))]
public class CsvWriterFactory : ITargetWriterFactory
{
    public bool CanWriteTarget(string target)
    {
        if (string.IsNullOrWhiteSpace(target))
            return false;
        string temp = target.ToLowerInvariant();
        if (!temp.StartsWith("file://"))
            return false;
        if (!temp.EndsWith(".csv") && !temp.EndsWith(".txt"))
            return false;
        return true;
    }

    public ITargetWriter CreateWriter(string target, string[] fieldNames, int[] fieldSizes, string config)
    {
        return new CsvWriterPlugin(target, fieldNames, fieldSizes, config);
    }
}
```

Possible extension plugins could be stuff like:
* ODBC reader/writer
* SQLite reader/writer
* XML reader/writer
* Salesforce SOQL reader (that would be cool), Salesforce writer

Commit message:

Added exit codes. Added documentation on running the application.

README.md, after:

# no-frills-transformation

"No frills transformation" (NFT) is intended to be a super lightweight transformation engine, with very limited support for reading and writing stuff, but having an extensible interface.

Out of the box, NFT will read:

* CSV files

and write

* CSV files

because... that's what I currently need ;-)

In an ETL scenario, NFT is neither designed to do the "E" nor the "L" part, just simple "T" tasks. 
But that quickly and efficiently, supporting the basic transformation stuff you might need (and
 with extensibility support if you need something out of the order). Among supported transformations are:

* Copy (nop transformation, copy source to target)
* Lookup (in other sources)
* Filtering (on source data)

Feel free to contribute and create pull requests. I'll check them out and merge them if they make sense.

## Binary Downloads

There are no binary downloads just yet.

This project has to settle down a little first, then I'll release something.

I'd say that NFT may already be used in production, or for serious things, like migrations and stuff,
but there's still too many parts moving. Check back in a while, or, if you can't get it to compile, 
get back to me.

## Acknowledgements

NFT (the CSV plugin to be more precise) is using parts of the brilliant CSV reader library written by
Sebastien Lorion. You can find the original project page at CodeProject:

http://www.codeproject.com/Articles/9258/A-Fast-CSV-Reader

NFT has pulled in the CSV parts in the source code directly. They can be found here:

https://github.com/DonMartin76/no-frills-transformation/tree/master/src/3rdParty/LumenWorks.Framework.IO

## Introduction

Nah. I hate reading. Let's get into the details on usage.

## Configuration

The basic idea of NFT is that you configure the transformations using an XML file. The XML file contains
the following main parts:

* A data source
* Source filters
* A target
* Lookup map definitions
* Target field definitions

### Sample XML config file

A typical simple XML configuration may look like this:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<Transformation>
  <Source config="delim=','">file://C:\temp\users.csv</Source>
  <Target config="delim=','">file://C:\temp\Accounts.csv</Target>
  <LookupMaps>
    <LookupMap keyField="id" name="Status">
      <Source config="delim=','">file://C:\temp\status_mapping.csv</Source>
    </LookupMap>
  </LookupMaps>

  <FilterMode>AND</FilterMode>
  <SourceFilters>
    <!-- In shorter, this is just Contains($SOBID, "A") -->
    <SourceFilter>EqualsIgnoreCase(If(Contains($SOBID, "A"), "hooray", "boo"), "HooRay")</SourceFilter>
  </SourceFilters>

  <Mappings>
    <Mapping>
      <Fields>
        <!-- The target row number -->
        <Field name="RowNo" maxSize="10">TargetRowNum()</Field>
        <!-- The source row number -->
        <Field name="SourceRowNo" maxSize="10">SourceRowNum()</Field>
        <!-- Plain copy of field content -->
        <Field name="SapUserId__c" maxSize="16">LowerCase($SOBID)</Field>
        <!-- Concatenation of two source fields -->
        <Field name="Whatever" maxSize="50">Concat($OTYPE, $OBJID)</Field>
        <!-- status mapping from lookup "Status" (see definition above) -->
        <Field name="Status" maxSize="40">Status($BOGUSTYPE, $salesforce_status)</Field>
      </Fields>
    </Mapping>
  </Mappings>
</Transformation>
```

So, what does this do?
* Reads data from `C:\temp\users.csv`
* Writes data to `C:\temp\Accounts.csv`
* Loads a lookup map into the operator `Status` from `C:\temp\status_mapping.csv`
* Sets the filter mode to `AND` (all filter criteria must be met)
* Specifies a filter by using an expression which evaluates to a boolean
* Specifies a mapping with five output fields, each with a name, max size and an expression

Please confer with the later sections for a more detailed specification of the options.


### Running the application

Just call the executable with the full path to the XML configuration file.

```
C:\Temp> NoFrillsTransformation.exe sample_config.xml
Operation completed successfully.
C:\Temp> 
```
If the operation completes without error, the executable with exit with the exit code 0 (Success).
Otherwise, an error message will be output to `stderr` and the exit code unequal 0 (for now, 1).


#### Logging output

Not implemented yet. I will come up with something here.

## XML specification

### Source and Target tags

**Mandatory tags**

The syntax for source and target tags is as follows:
```xml
<Source config="config string">source URI</Source>
<Target config="config string">target URI</Source>
```

| Tag/Attribute | Description|
| ------------- | ----------- |
| `Source`		| Tag used for the data source of the transformation; must only be present once in the configuration |
| `Target`		| Tag used for the target of the transformation; must only be present once in the configuration |
| `config`		| Configuration string for the reader/writer. The format of this string is depending on the plugin selected for reading/writing to the URI |

##### CSV Reader Configuration Syntax

The CSV Reader which is supplied with NFT out of the box supports the following configuration settings, supplied in this format:

```
option1=value1 option2=value2
```

| Option | Possible values |
| ------ | --------------- |
| `delim`  | Delimiter character; defaults to `','`. Other normal option is `';'` |
| `multiline` | Switches support for multiline CSV records on or off; possible values are `false` or `true`. Defaults to `true` |


##### CSV Writer Configuration Syntax

The CSV Writer which is supplied with NFT out of the box supports the following configuration settings, supplied in this format:

```
option1=value1 option2=value2
```

| Option | Possible values |
| ------ | --------------- |
| `delim`  | Delimiter character; defaults to `','`. Other normal option is `';'` |

### <a name="lookupTag"></a>Lookup map definitions

_Optional tags_

The syntax for defining lookup maps is as follows:
```xml
<LookupMaps>
	<LookupMap keyField="key field" name="operator name">
		<Source config="config string">source URI</Source>
	</LookupMap>
</LookupMaps>
```

The tag `LookupMap` may be defined multiply. The tag `LookupMaps` (the container) must only exist once (or not at all, if not needed).

| Tag/Attribute | Description|
| ------------- | ----------- |
| `LookupMaps`	| Container tag for the lookup maps |
| `LookupMap`	| Tag for defining a lookup map |
| `keyField`	| This attribute defines which field in the source is used for indexing. This is the field which will serve as the key for the lookup map. |
| `name`		| The name of the lookup map. This name can be used in expressions to look up values when transforming to output fields. [See section on lookups](#lookup) below (Expression syntax) |
| `Source`		| Tag used for the data source of the lookup map |
| `config`		| Configuration string for the reader. The format of this string is depending on the plugin selected for reading from the URI |

### Filtering

_Optional tags_

The filtering definition section of the configuration file consists of the following parts:
```xml
<FilterMode>filter mode</FilterMode>
<SourceFilters>
	<SourceFilter>boolean filter expression</SourceFilter>
</SourceFilters>
```

| Tag/Attribute | Description|
| ------------- | ----------- |
| `FilterMode`	| This tag decides on the filtering mode; possible values are `AND` and `OR`. In `AND` mode, all filter criteria must be met. In `OR` mode, one or more criteria must be met. |
| `SourceFilters` | Container tag for source filters. |
| `SourceFilter` | Definition of a filter; any number of this tag may exist. Content of this tag must be an Expression which evaluates to a boolean value. The expression may contain all operators available within NFT, [even including lookups](#lookup) |

**Example:**

```xml
<FilterMode>OR</FilterMode>
<SourceFilters>
	<SourceFilter>StartsWith($LastName, "A")</SourceFilter>
	<SourceFilter>StartsWith($LastName, "B")</SourceFilter>
</SourceFilters>
```
This filter definition will take all source rows in which the field `LastName` starts with either A or B.

### <a name="fields"></a>Field definitions

**Mandatory tags**

Within the `Mappings` tags, the output fields are defined using expressions.
```xml
<Mappings>
  <Mapping>
    <Fields>
	  <!-- Multiple occurance -->
      <Field name="field name" maxSize="max size">field expression</Field>
    </Fields>
  </Mapping>
</Mappings>
```

| Tag/Attribute | Description|
| ------------- | ----------- |
| `Mappings`    | Container tag for mappings |
| `Mapping`     | Container tag for a single mapping. Currently, NFT only supports a single mapping, this might change in the future, though |
| `Fields`      | Container tag for field definitions. |
| `Field`       | Field definition. Must contain a field expression evaluating to a string (or bool, which is converted to `true` or `false`). See below for [possible expression operators](#expressionSyntax). |
| `name`        | The name of the output field; this is the field name as it will be passed to the writer, e.g. for writing a header row (in case of CSV) |
| `maxSize`     | The maximum size of the output field (in characters). This is currently not used by the CSV reader or writer, but may be useful for future plugins, such as database writers. |

**Examples:**

```xml
<Field name="FirstName">$FNAM</Field>
```
Copies (no transformation) the content of the source field `FNAM` into a target field called `FirstName`

```xml
<Field name="FullName">Concat($FNAM, Concat(" ", $LNAM))</Field>
```
Concatenates the source fields `FNAM` and `LNAM` and a space (as a string literal `" "`) and outputs that into a target field `FullName`

```xml
<LookupMaps>
	<LookupMap keyField="statusId" name="StatusLookup">
		<Source config="delim=','">file://C:\Temp\StatusMap.csv</Source>
	</LookupMap>
</LookupMaps>
...
<Field name="Status">StatusLookup($STATUS, $Description)</Field>
...
```
Looks up the `Description` field from a defined lookup with the name `StatusLookup`, using the key in the source field `STATUS`.
This requires the lookup having been defined using a `<LookupMap>` tag (see example code).

### <a name="expressionSyntax"></a>Expression syntax

Expressions can be freely combined, as long as the return types are correct. There are only
two different return types (currently), bool and string.

In addition to the operators below, there are two special expressions: Field names, and string
literals. Both can be used anywhere a string expression can be used (with one exception, see [Lookup](#lookup)).

A field name is given by using the dollar ($) operator: e.g. `$title`, or `$firstName`.

A string literal is defined by putting a string within double quotes, e.g. `"this is a text"`.

#### And

And operator. Returns `true` if both parameters return true.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `And(param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | bool |
| Parameter 2 | bool |
| Return type | bool |

**Example:** `And(Contains($title, "Lord"), Contains($author, "Tolkien"))`

#### Concat

Concatenates two strings.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `Concat(param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | string |

**Example**: `Concat($firstName, Concat(" ", $lastName))`
 

#### Contains, ContainsIgnoreCase

Checks whether parameter 1 contains parameter 2. Comes in two flavors, `Contains` which takes
casing into account, and `ContainsIgnoreCase` which doesn't.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `Contains[IgnoreCase](param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | bool |

**Example**: `ContainsIgnoreCase($companyName, "Ltd.")`


#### EndsWith

Checks whether parameter 1 ends with parameters, returns a boolean value.
This operator ignores the case.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `EndsWith(param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | bool |

**Example**: `EndsWith($companyName, "Ltd.")`


#### Equals, EqualsIgnoreCase

Checks whether to strings are equal. Comes in two flavors, `Equals` and `EqualsIgnoreCase`.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `Equals[IgnoreCase](param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | bool |

**Example**: `Equals($firstName, "Martin")`


#### If

Evaluates the first argument; if it evaluates to `true`, returns the second argument, otherwise
the third.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `If(condition, param1, param2)` |
| Condition | bool |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | string |

**Example**: `If(Contains($firstName, "Martin"), "good", "bad")`


#### <a name="lookup"></a>Lookups

Lookups must be defined in the LookupMaps described above. After that, the name of the lookup
map can be used as a binary operator which returns a string value.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `[LookupName](param1, param2)`, `[LookupName]` is defined with the `name` [attribute of the `LookupMap` tag](#lookupTag). |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | string |

**Example**:
```xml
<LookupMaps>
  <LookupMap keyField="id" name="StatusLookup">
    <Source config="delim=','">file://C:\Temp\status_mapping.csv</Source>
  </LookupMap>
</LookupMaps>
```

In the [section on the field definitions](#fields) there is a further simple example on how to use lookup maps in expressions.

**Pro tip:** Nested lookups are also allowed. Typical use cases would be string to string mappings, where the source field
and desired outcome may not be strings, but rather indexes. Example:
```xml
<Field name="Status">TargetStatus(SourceStatus($StatusId, $StatusText), $TargetText)</Field>
```
This expression first looks up a `StatusText` from the `SourceStatus` lookup map, then maps that text using the `TargetStatus`
lookup map, and subsequently outputs the `TargetText` of that map into a target field called `Status`. The transformation is thus
the following:

```
Source.StatusId --> SourceStatus.StatusText --> TargetStatus.TargetText --> Target.Status
```

#### LowerCase

Transforms a string into lower case.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `LowerCase(param1)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Return type | string |

**Example**: `LowerCase($emailAddress)`


#### Or

Or operator. Returns `true` if one of the parameters return true.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `Or(param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | bool |
| Parameter 2 | bool |
| Return type | bool |

**Example**: `Or(Contains($title, "Lord"), Contains($title, "Ring"))`


#### StartsWith

Checks whether parameter 1 starts with parameters, returns a boolean value.
This operator ignores the case.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `StartsWith(param1, param2)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Parameter 2 | string |
| Return type | bool |

**Example**: `StartsWith($lastName, "M")`


#### UpperCase

Transforms a string into upper case.

| What       | Type |
| ----------- | -------- |
| Syntax | `UpperCase(param1)` |
| Parameter 1 | string |
| Return type | string |

**Example**: `UpperCase($city)`


## Extension points

NFT is leveraging MEF ([Microsoft Extension Framework](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/en-en/library/dd460648(v=vs.110).aspx))
for dependency injection (inversion of control). There are two interfaces which may be used to hook into NFT:

```csharp
public interface ISourceReaderFactory
{
    bool CanReadSource(string source);

    ISourceReader CreateReader(string source, string config);
    bool SupportsQuery { get; }
}

public interface ITargetWriterFactory
{
    bool CanWriteTarget(string target);
    ITargetWriter CreateWriter(string target, string[] fieldNames, int[] fieldSizes, string config);
}
```

Both interfaces make use of methods to find out whether the reader/writer can read/write the source/target, based on
the format of the source/target string.

As an example, the CSV Plugin returns true for URIs starting with `file://` and ending with `.csv`.

### Writing plugins

Writing a plugin consists of following these steps:

* Create a new assembly for .NET 4.0 and reference `NoFrillsTransformation.Interfaces` and `System.ComponentModel.Composition` (this is the MEF framework)
* Implement `ISourceReaderFactory` and/or `ITargetWriterFactory`
* Mark the classes as `[Export(typeof(ISourceReaderFactory))]` or `[Export(typeof(ITargetWriterFactory))]`, respectively (see below)
* Implement the `ISourceReader` and `IRecord` interfaces for reading sources
* And/or implement the `ITargetWriter` interface for writing to targets

Make sure that the assembly resides in the same directory as the EXE file; NFT should now automatically
pick up the plugin and start reading and/or writing from/to the new source/target.

Snippet from the `CsvWriterFactory`:

```csharp
[Export(typeof(NoFrillsTransformation.Interfaces.ITargetWriterFactory))]
public class CsvWriterFactory : ITargetWriterFactory
{
    public bool CanWriteTarget(string target)
    {
        if (string.IsNullOrWhiteSpace(target))
            return false;
        string temp = target.ToLowerInvariant();
        if (!temp.StartsWith("file://"))
            return false;
        if (!temp.EndsWith(".csv") && !temp.EndsWith(".txt"))
            return false;
        return true;
    }

    public ITargetWriter CreateWriter(string target, string[] fieldNames, int[] fieldSizes, string config)
    {
        return new CsvWriterPlugin(target, fieldNames, fieldSizes, config);
    }
}
```

Possible extension plugins could be stuff like:
* ODBC reader/writer
* SQLite reader/writer
* XML reader/writer
* Salesforce SOQL reader (that would be cool), Salesforce writer
